[Music]
hey here's mine I'm dr. Becky and
welcome back to my channel and welcome
to Christmas with me as well because
it's December now and I am home for
Christmas and Christmas in the sellers
household you know I turn into like a
veritable Tiny Tim really I demonstrated
by my Christmas jumper which gets better
by the way wait for it oh oh god you
have no idea I'll be the spacing it's
like Disney Christmas and a sort of
electronic engineering dream but never
mind Christmas it's December and there
are things to see in the side and things
to talk about what it happened at this
month so without further ado let's get
into it let's get into December 28 teams
Sky News so let's start with the planets
that are still visible in the sky this
month so Venus is still incredibly
bright in the pre-dawn skies in the
southeast in the morning absolutely
gorgeous
mercury enters that last month is up
there too but it's sort of past its
point of sort of farthest away from the
Sun in the sky so it's getting lower
each morning but what you should look
out for
it's December 21st which also results
this is when Jupiter is actually going
to pass really close tomatoes also
Jupiter is currently on the rise it's
getting higher and higher each morning
and on December 21st mercury and Jupiter
only really close in the sky along with
Venus sort of higher up above them and
basically will you be able to see is
sort of the smallest and the largest
filing in the solar system very close to
each other in the sky at the same time
which which is a spectacular sight that
any morning really but especially on the
Solstice acting pad the sort of the
longest night of the winter in the
northern hemisphere anyway you know have
a really late sunrise and so even if
you're not even at that area you'll
probably still be able to catch too
personally and Venus all in the sky at
the same time then getting later in the
month Christmas Eve the 24th
so the Beehive cluster which is M force
and four really nice open cluster in the
sky you can spot it with your naked eye
in the constellation of cancer which is
next to Gemini which is the bub Orion
and you should be able to find that
quite easily remove
is gonna pass sort of straight over the
Beehive cluster and it's gonna be almost
full as well so on the night at the 24
Christmas Eve show you be home probably
with a glass of sherry or something
putting out the mid side by the
Christmas you should look up at sunset
so you can conversable spot the Beehive
cluster in concert and then throughout
the night if it gets later for you in
fed watch as the Moon moves across the
sky and eventually passes in front of
the beehive cluster so much that it's so
bright that you actually will ever see
what you have cluster anymore either and
then obviously the moon or move away
from it again and you'll be able to spot
it get some binoculars on it see how
many stars you can see really really
nice thing to look for especially on
these long nights in the December
speaking of Christmas Eve as well check
out when the International Space Station
is visible for you and your town because
I know that in the UK is going to be
visible on Christmas Eve and Christmas
Day morning as well going overhead
actually quite high it's a fantastic
sight to see because it's incredibly
bright in the sky and it moves you're
some surprise that hunt bus it moves in
the sky overhead like it's clearly not
too plain and it's clearly not too
subtle either so that kind of thing
especially Christmas Eve Christmas Day
could look like by the Christmas going
over in his sleigh for any of you
parents out there as well really nice
thing to look out for I'll put the link
which can show you for your hometown
like what date and time and how far
above the horizon it's visible in the
description below so go check that out
and then after Christmas I guess we've
got I have someone to look forward to in
the new year so one thing to look
forward to is new moons coming early on
in the year which is exciting because if
you combine that with the really long
nights around the Solstice then you're
gonna have really really dark long
nights for observing so hopefully the
weather will hold out early in January
and we'll be able to get outside and see
some really really dark nights for
observing now this is gonna be really
important because there's another meteor
shower coming up as well it's the core
drunkest meteor shower and meaning I've
never heard of that consolation but if
it doesn't exist anymore as a
constellation the radiant for this
meteor shower is actually going to be
sort of around about the ham
they dip her or the plow and so it's
gonna be really high in the sky for
people in the northern hemisphere and so
it's going to be really nice chance to
spot some meteors kinda difficult to
predict with this one how many you might
end up seeing you know so the
predictions are about 50 to 100 also
it's a very narrow peak with which you
can see it like it's not sort of a long
drawn-out saying over a couple weeks
like some at the end of the year this
one is very much like 2 a.m. January 4th
if you don't go out sort of really in
that hour or so time so you're gonna
miss it so if anybody is up late January
maybe you're back at work on night
shifts or maybe you're just extending
the Christmas revelry period I don't
know
check out the quadratus meteor shower
and see if you can spot some a new
assembly location since you know I
always always want to see you roses
pictures and see what kind of stargazing
you put up soon alright let's come back
down at the earth of the book now and
chat about everything that's been going
on in the news in the past month or it
is a lot so strapping cuz we're here for
a while
[Music]
so big news this month is that nothing
in sight probe actually landed on Mars
and for those of you who missed it I did
a vlog of the landing party that Oxford
physics had which was great we had some
of the team scientists who work on the
project in Oxford there as well and it
was like super tense and we followed the
landings no idea if it was going to go
right but thankfully it landed safely on
Mars they're gonna paint back in an
image pretty quickly as well which was
great it's amazing that like we don't
have to wait for these kind of things
these days
and with social media it's broadcast all
around the world but oh hey we landed
for Obama and within about half an hour
Nathan image of it which is pretty cool
since it landed on November 26 it has
since then it sent back another couple
of images of a selfie image that showed
it on the surface of Mars it also sent
one back showing that it solar panels
had unfurled and as they were supposed
to as well and obviously that's very
important for it to get power so that
instruments can function because what
it's trying to do is measure Mars quakes
so just like an earthquake you know what
is going on in Mars interior in terms of
its core and you know it's mantle and if
there's any magma down there or causing
earthquakes with tectonic plates
shifting around just like on earth as
well and the idea that we eventually
gain understanding of how all of the
inner planets in the solar system formed
and how that's led to sort of their
current evolution and states in the
solar system as well the thing that I
love about this though is it also
recorded the sound of the Martian wind
so it's got a pressure sensor on the
actual lunda and that pressure sensor
picks up vibrations in the atmosphere it
can send back the vibrations and we can
turn those into actual sound that we can
then hear and so this is the recording
that they got from the pressure sensor
it's really cool so they also like can
bump it off for a couple of options as
well so if you didn't hear that then it
might have been because you weren't
using headphones but here's what it
sounds like bumped up a couple of
opt-ins
[Music]
it sounds like wind right I played it to
my partner and he thought that it
sounded like a heartbeat at first which
is also quite poetic but it Martian wind
it's been a really good month for Space
Exploration because the next two things
on my legs are also space exploration as
well so first of all Voyager had left
the solar system which I love that we
should just change like Elvis has left
the building
- like belligerents left for solar
system this is Voyager 2 Voyager 1
already left his autism band back in
August 2012 rode to left at the
beginning of December but in a
completely different part of the solar
system different divided one though is
that Voyager two sensors were still
working so it had a sensor detect cosmic
rays and it had a sensor to detect the
solar wind particles from the Sun that
sort of marked the edge of where the
solar system is so the magnetic field of
the Sun sort of extends a certain
distance away and it sort of binds sort
of all the particles that have flown off
the Sun in the solar wind for charged
particles into that sphere so as soon as
something crosses that boundary is when
the particles and the solar wind count
will drop and then also cosmic rays will
increase because that magnetic field of
the Sun tends to deflect a lot of the
high-energy cosmic rays that come from
interstellar space and so both of those
detectors detecting cosmic rays and the
solar wind flash was employed or two
were both working and when Voyager 1
left the solar system only the cosmic
ray detector was working and so that was
the only way that we knew it is bless us
all a system because those counts
increased this time we've seen those
counts increased and we've seen the
counts in the solar wind drop off so we
have actual measurements from the edge
of the solar system of the sun's
influence dropping off now from when
Voyager 2 has actually left which is
pretty cool in my book and so this is
going to last on am is sort of better
understand the influence of the Sun and
the extent of the Sun as well and so
we're still learning
duh from Voyager which launched over 40
years ago which is kind of incredible
alright next up is a Syrus Rex arrived
at been you notice that was Rex down
floor and I have to write it down
because I couldn't remember out the
domain it stands for origins spectral
interpretation resource identification
security regolith Explorer yeah that was
a really lengthy name from that server
okay we're gonna go with it okay I need
to do this with NASA's mission to send a
space probe to an asteroid with the
eventually landing it one day on the
asteroid taking a sample and bringing
that sample back to earth
so this is a really exciting mission
that's scheduled to return about 2023
but obviously before it can come back
and have to get there and so it arrived
sort of in and around venue on December
3rd 2018 and so in that time what it did
was it sort of fired its boosted in
order to take it from sort of traveling
to actually sort of insert you around
venue in it so that in operations now
it's not quite in orbit yet they're
changing its orbit all the time it
eventually will settle into an orbit
the idea is to image the surface in very
minut detail and that will allow us them
to pick a place on the surface to land
and those are the best the flattest
place probably that it can learn on the
surface of any career though it's about
12 miles or 19 kilometers off the
surface of venue during this sort of
survey about North Pole example the
equator and all the regions of beni
which is quite a small asteroid and the
idea is to sort of get a better estimate
of its mass and its density its size and
its composition just so again we can
better understand sort of how this all
system overhaul has formed so once it's
finished up there they mode though it
will sort of enter a proper orbit of
value on December 31st New Year's Eve
and at that point it will become like
the smallest body that ever been orbited
by a spacecraft Italy something like
60,000 feet or at 500 meters across
other thing is pretty small may only
been there a matter of weeks though and
it's already managed to find evidence of
like surface water on been you like
trapped in all the clay
minerals that make up the surface so the
spacecraft has the thing called
spectrometers onboard which take the
light that's reflected from the Sun off
Ben you spit it through a prism and you
know you get it rainbow or spectra of
light and then what they do is they look
for missing colors or missing
wavelengths of light in that spectra and
those are absorption features from
molecules in on the surface of venue and
they've managed to find sort of oxygen
and hydrogen containing compounds
suggesting that water in various
hydroxyl compounds which isn't really
really cool that they've already managed
to detect that in a matter of weeks Venu
is too small to host liquid water though
you know it's not gravitationally strong
enough to hold on to it so these things
are definitely locked in the minerals
themselves rather than anything actual
liquid water and the main theory that's
come out of this if it actually perhaps
like a larger parent body that venue
like throat off of in the formation
perhaps you know sort of quite a large
meteor smash into a big lump of rock and
that's called it splits apart maybe that
larger body while actually capable of
holding water and did and then obviously
benny we've got traces of that when it
broke off so that's the theory that's
coming out of this discovery in the
first couple of weeks of this mission
which is I'm really excited for to see
you know what it finds in the future and
if it can actually get a sample back to
us you know a couple of grounds what
it's going to bring back but still that
would be so exciting sticking with the
solar system again and space exploration
didn't you see the amazing images that
have come from NASA's Juno mission
that's around Jupiter at the minute so
these were taken at the end of October
when Juno did so that it's close flyby
with Jupiter sort of while it's in orbit
around Jupiter but someone's process
them and NASA released them at the
beginning of this month and they are so
detailed they are absolutely gorgeous
but the really cool thing is that people
and said that they can see a dolphin in
the cloud structure on beautif so
Jupiter hug all these amazing shapes and
features on itself it because it
atmosphere is incredibly turbulent so
these fans are created by the fact that
you have warm air
rising and then as it sort of cools
again it will sink again and so the
lighter bands are called zones and
that's where you've got the warm air
rising up and then the darker areas are
the places where the cool air isn't
falling again but you've been also got
winds in each of those zones and bands
and they're usually going in opposite
directions as well so you have very
strong wind blowing in opposite
directions
in two bands that are also of different
temperatures and so the interactions you
get between where those two sort of
zones and bands meet means that you get
incredibly turbulent interactions things
like Kelvin Helmholtz interactions as
well and so you get these amazing shapes
including things that look like dolphins
which is pretty awesome does it beat
meets Jupiter which is my favorite image
of Jupiter probably not a bit better
than the penguin galaxy though no no in
my book nothing beats the penguin galaxy
speaking of a solar system exploration
still do not forget that New Horizons
flyby of an asteroid is coming up on New
Year's Day in January in 2019 so if you
remember New Horizons a couple years
back is the amazing flyby of Pluto we've
got these incredible images of Pluto and
its moon and we found out so much
information about the whole system so
much more than we had before so much
federate images than we ever got using
the Hubble Space Telescope of Pluto so
now it's done that flyby of Pluto it's
flying by this asteroid called Ultima
Thule out in the Kuiper belt
so asteroid way out in the solar system
with the idea again of understanding how
the solar system formed how these icy
bodies on the very edge of the solar
system came to be as the Sun was forming
and so I'm really excited to see what
science comes out of that so put it in
your Diaries because it's going to be a
really quick flyby with a lot of science
coming very very quick and fast in those
first 24 hours so that'll be something
to look forward to in the new year and
finally something that is not a solar
system related this month we've been
doing really well with our old system
acceleration NSA but for new
gravitational wave
have been announced by the Lego and
Virgo teens which is really exciting it
brings the total of protections to 11
that's 10 flat called blackhole measures
and one neutron star neutron star merger
so the four that have been announced
they were from back in 2017 so
intersection in July and 3 in August all
of which were black hole black hole
merger events which is really exciting
so like oh and Virgo are basically these
huge detectors LIGO is two detectors in
the US and burger is one in Europe and
basically what they are these big L
shapes and you've got mirrors sort of at
the vertices of all of the L shapes and
what they do is they fire a laser down
each of the sort of tunnels built
underground on these L shapes and they
measure how long it takes the light to
travel down the tunnel bounced off the
mirror and come back again because you
know how fast the speed of light is
going you can then get a very very
specific very accurate measure of the
distance of that tunnel that you've
built under the ground you can know the
distance is something like one ten
thousandth of the diameter of a proton
or something like it's incredibly
incredibly precise and you need that
precision because when you have these
black hole black hole mergers that puts
gravitational waves into the sort of
fabric of space-time that Einstein came
up with so you can imagine them
physically rippling this space in
between the earth and the black hole
black hole merger and so when those who
are potential waves get it actually
physically compresses and expands the
distance the actual physical distance in
space between two objects but those
ripples are so so sort of tiny by the
time they get to earth and so you have
to have something that an incredibly
precise that can measure the incredibly
small differences in the distance of an
object obviously know if there's an
earthquake or some local disturbance
that is gonna cause the mirrors to shake
on the ground and therefore you will
sort of detect this change in distance
which is why you build more than one
because then you know that it's not a
local discernment you know that it's
come from somewhere in the universe and
the three of them allow
also triangulate the sort of direction
that the signal came from as well which
was how they were able to find that
optional counterpart to the one that was
released last year as well so really
cool result there's four more of them
now it means that you can start doing
statistics on the population yes and
only 11 but 11 it's better than 1 and so
they have started to do those statistics
now with this data which is really
exciting it'll give us an idea though of
how many of these black holes form a
universe and how frequent these mergers
of these objects are and the next step
for Lyle and Virgo is also you know
they're detected black hole black pool
mergers and intersect a neutron neutron
star merger but what about a black hole
managing with the neutron star and so
that's the next step and it kind of
looks like that's what they're aiming
for to discover next so I guess watch
this space for them announcing that
discovery whenever it might be it guess
it's just a waiting game now so that was
everything for me this month like there
was so much stuff that I didn't talk
about this month that I could have we
could have talked about the fact that
Virgin Galactic got to space there was a
supernova in m77 we could have talked
about the fact that the park or Solar
Probe is starting to send back its first
bits of data as well hopefully another
month we'll have a chance to talk about
those because so much already happened
this month as well but I hope you
enjoyed that I hope you had fun
listening to me chat and getting excited
about solar system exploration because
it's one of my favorite things this is
me clocking off now for Christmas I'm
gonna have a little bit of a break and I
will be back in January with more videos
I hope to see you all there until then
happy holidays everybody I hope you have
a good one
dr. Becky over enough flashes okay oh my
god why am I still so gross and so the
idea is that we'll eventually
thanks mom should make my thing too much
me to be John he sort of big L make it
help there we go
my god Merry Christmas - are all in
slalom good night